Notes for Lab 4: Molecular docking

Question 1: Try to identify three molecular 
    interactions between the ligand and the residues of the protein 
    receptor. Write down type of interaction, as well as the type of 
    residue with its corresponding residue number. What, according 
    to you, is the driving force for this particular ligand to bind 
    the receptor in this way?
Answer:
    There seems to be a lot of aromatic stacking.
        TRP 100
        TRP 386
        PHE 390
    Hydrogen bonds.
        ASP 114
        (TYR 416, ?)
    The main driving force is hydrophobic interactions.


Question 2: Do all docked poses geometrically align with the 
    crystal structure binding pose, i.e. bioactive conformationa? 
    The poses that align well, how is their total energy? Are molecules 
    that are in a bioactive conformation always among the lowest 
    in energy? Was the redocking of the ligand successful?
Answer:
    The poses with lowest energy align reasonably close with the crystal
    structure. Their total energy is clearly seperated from the rest
    as seen in Figure 3, at around -60 Docking Score. 
    Thermodynamically, the best binding should have the lowest energy, 
    but I suppose if it's too low it would permanently bind, 
    becoming an inhibitor. The redocking seems to have been successful.


Question 3A: What can you tell about the properties of the ligands, 
    do they follow a specific rule? Is there any particular property 
    in the ligands/decoys that supports your answer in Question 1 
    about molecular interactions? Do the decoys have similar properties 
    to the approved drugs?
Answer:
    The ligands have similar number of ring structures and a positive
    charge in the middle.
    The decoys look very similar, but often have more polar areas
    breaking up the hydrophobic interactions.


Question 3B: Based on the relative ranks and names of the first 
    compounds, can you draw an estimate of the ROC curve on the 
    grid below? Does this model enrich ligands, decoys, or is there 
    no preference?
Answer:
    It seems to enrich ligands as there are more ligands in the top ranks.


Question 4: You work on a drug discovery project in a pharmaceutical 
    company tackling Parkinson’s disease. Pick three compounds from 
    the screen you like and elaborate why. Think in terms of the 
    molecular interactions and potential chemical expansion into a 
    leadlike molecule. Keep your favorites in a session that you can 
    show to the teaching assistant.
Answer:
    22 -- has a ring in the outer part, could be used for reactions in case
        we need specific properties.
    3 & 83 -- smaller, easier to get through the blood-brain barrier.
        Problem, 3 has a lot of polar areas making it less lipophylic.
        83 only has two positive areas.