Bioinformatics lab 3 notes
Rasmus Hammar
2025-11-27


Q1: What is the difference between these two valine residues? 
    Based on what you have learned in your lectures, 
    is the second form biologically possible?
Asnwer:
    They are mirrored.
    In nature all aa are L (but D-versions can be made and 
    included artificially).


Q2: What do records that begin with the keyword HETATM describe?
Answer:
    ATOM = atoms in proteins and nucleic acids.
    HETATM = atoms in other molecules.


Q3: How many structures of the protein have been determined 
    with a resolution better than 1.3 Å? Why is it important to 
    know the possibilities of this search function? (What problem 
    can you run into if your search is too general?)
Answer:
    236 (QUERY: UniProt Molecule Name HAS ANY OF WORDS "Subtilisin" AND Data Collection Resolution > 1.3)
    1 (QUERY: UniProt Molecule Name = "Subtilisin" AND Data Collection Resolution > 1.3)
    If the search is too general there are too many irrerelevant
    entries to check.

Q4: How would you judge the quality of these two structures? 
    How do they compare? Can you think of reasons why one of 
    them might be worse than the other? Do you think one or 
    both of them is trustworthy?
Answer:
    1sbt has pretty bad metrics (res 2.50 Å)
    2z2y has better metrics (res 1.89 Å)

    1sbt is a lot older. If I can instead use a newer entry
    with better metrics that would be better.


Q5: Based on the Jnet prediction, what percentage of the 
    residues in the query sequence are predicted to be in α-helices, 
    β-strands, and coil regions?
Answer:
    E = 95 (24.2 %)
    H = 116 (29.5 %)
    - = 182 (46.3 %)
    Total = 393
    --------------EEEEEEE---------EEEEEE---------------------------EEEE-----------------EEEE---EEEE------EEEE-------HHHHHHHHHH---HHHHHHH------HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH----HHHHHHHHH------E--------HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH------EEEEEE------EEEEEEEE-----EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE--------------HHHHHHHHHHHHHHH-----HHHHHHHH------EEEEEEEEEEEE--EEEEEE------EEE------EEEEEE---EE-----EEEE-----HHHHHHHHHHHHHH---


Q6: Does the prediction give any indications that your protein 
    has surface helices?
    Reason why in relation to Figure 3.4. Try to find at least one 
    helix where this pattern is fullfilled.
Answer:
    Yes, there appear to be some surface helices. The pattern described
    in Figure 3.4 shows how hydrophobic/polar residues are arranged in
    a helix so that one side is polar/exposed and the other hydrophobic/buried.
    Residues 113 - 120 have pattern B--BB-BB and is predicted to be in a helix.


Q7: Are there any indications that your protein has disordered regions?
Answer:
    There are a few spots within the first 50 residues that are predicted 
    to be disordered.


Q8: Were the secondary structure, accessibility and disorder 
    predictions you made correct?
Answer:
    Somewhat, but the AIUpred doesn't feel reliable enough to be all that useful.


Q9: Does the DeepTMHMM server predict any transmembrane helices 
    for your protein?
    What type of topology does DeepTMHMM predict for your protein?
Answer:
    Predicts Globular protein. No transmembrane helices.


Q10: How many helices are predicted for these proteins?
Answer:
    Helices = 7 for all proteins.
    

Q11: Are the predictions different for different proteins and/or 
    different servers?
Answer:
    Same for both servers I tried.

Q12: What is the name of your GPCR? Where is it predominantly 
    expressed according to the UniProt Expression tab? Explain 
    shortly its function.
Answer:
    Protein #3 -- P41143
    Name: Delta-type opioid receptor
    Expressed in the brain.
    Inhibits neurotransmitter release leading to pain relief. (Morphine is good stuff.)


Q13: Analyze the pLDDT confidence scores of your GPCR structure. 
    Which regions are colored in red (low confidence) and which are 
    colored in blue (high confidence)? How do these regions correspond 
    to the predicted structural features (e.g., helices, loops, 
    or disordered regions)?
Answer:
    The central helices are blue (high confidence), while loops and strands that
    are very flexible are red (low confidence).


Q14: Visualize the structure in PyMOL, focusing on regions of high and 
    low pLDDT scores. Which structural features (e.g., helices, loops, 
    or disordered regions) correspond to these confidence levels?
Answer:
    The colors (red/blue) are inverted compared to the pLDDT plot
    in the colab notebook. Otherwise, the evaluation is the same.


Q15: Compare the Sequence Coverage plot with the pLDDT vs. Residue 
    Index plot. Do regions with higher sequence coverage generally 
    correspond to higher confidence (blue regions) in the structure?
Answer:
    Seems so. The regions with lowest confidence and coverage are
    the beginning and end of the sequence. (Floppy loops.)


Q16: Review the PAE Matrix to identify regions with the highest 
    uncertainty in their relative positions. How does this relate 
    to the confidence levels in the pLDDT vs. Residue Index plot 
    and the observed features in the predicted structure?
Answer:
    The lowest confidence (high PAE scores) is along the borders
    of the matrix, which corresponds to the beginning and end of
    the sequence.
